\begin{frame}
  \titlepage
\end{frame}

\begin{frame}
  \tableofcontents
\end{frame}
	
== Background  ==

=== Mammalian Genomics ===

==== Not My Intro ====

<[center]
<<<figs/cascade.jpg,height=.6\textheight>>>
[center]>

==== What is a Mammal? ====

==== What is a Mammal? ====

<[columns]

[[[.45\linewidth]]]
<[center]
<<<figs/cute_kitten.jpg,width=.9\linewidth>>>

\vspace{.3cm}
{\huge Mammal}
[center]>

[[[.45\linewidth]]]
<[center]
<<<figs/aligator.jpg,width=.9\linewidth>>>

\vspace{.3cm}
{\huge Not a Mammal}
[center]>

[columns]>

==== Evolutionary History of Mammals ====
<[columns]

[[[.4\linewidth]]]
<[center]
<<<figs/mammals_10k.pdf,height=.6\textheight>>>

\fn{adapted from Haussler et al. \emph{J Hered} 2009}
[center]>

[[[.6\linewidth]]]
* Common ancestor 165-170 Mya 
* 100-85 Mya -- major extant orders have diverged
* History affects tree shape:
** Long external branches
** Deep but short internal branches
** More mammalian genomes ==> good bang for the buck
[columns]>

==== Evolutionary History of Mammals ====

<[columns]

[[[.4\linewidth]]]
<[center]
<<<figs/ancestral_primate.png,height=.4\textheight>>>

Sketch of a possible Cretaceous primate ancestor (~80 Mya) 

\fn{adapted from  Martin et al.\ (2007) \emph{Folia Primatol}}
[center]>

[[[.6\linewidth]]]
* Ancestral mammals were likely:
** Smaller than today
** Largely insectivorous
* General trend towards larger body, more specialized niche
* Life history can affect molecular evolution
** Body size ==> mutation rate
** Sexual behavior ==> sexual dimorphism, adaptation of gametogenesis genes

[columns]>

==== Mammalian Genomes ====
<[columns]

[[[.6\linewidth]]]
* Mammalian genomes are big
** 2.5-4.5 Gb of DNA, 20-80 chromosomes
* Relatively extensive structural evolution
** Chromosomal rearrangements
** Gene family expansion / contractions
** Transposable elements
* Stable set of core genes
** ~20,000 genes
** 80\% one-to-one with mouse, 82\% detectable homology with platypus

[[[.4\linewidth]]]
<[center]
<<<figs/chromosomes.png,angle=90,height=.6\textheight>>>

\fn{Wikipedia, public domain.}
[center]>

[columns]>	   

==== Mammalian Genomics ====
<[columns]
[[[.4\linewidth]]]
<[center]
<<<figs/vitruvian_man.jpg,height=.4	\textheight>>>
\vspace{.3cm}
<<<figs/mouse.jpg,height=.25\textheight>>>

\fn{Wikipedia, public domain / CC-share-alike.}
[center]>

[[[.6\linewidth]]]
* First human (2001)
* Then, mouse (2002)
* ... and rat (2004), chimpanzee, dog (2005), rhesus (2007), platypus (2008), cow, horse (2009), orangutan (2011)
* Big papers, major insights (5\% conserved, genome-wide \dnds, TE dynamics)

[columns]>	   

==== A quote ====
\vspace{.3cm}

\begin{exampleblock}{}
  {\large ``Genome comparison is a powerful tool for discovery. It can reveal
unknown---and even unsuspected---biological functions, by sifting the
records of evolutionary experiments that have occurred over 100 years
or over 100 million years. The \underline{\hspace*{1cm}} genome sequence illustrates the
range of information that can be gleaned from such studies.''}
  \vskip5mm
  {\tiny K. Lindblad-Toh et al. (2005). Genome sequence, comparative analysis and haplotype structure of the domestic dog.}
\end{exampleblock}
\begin{quote}
\end{quote}

==== The Mammalian Genome Project ====
<[columns]
[[[.4\linewidth]]]
<[center]
<<<figs/mammals_29.pdf,height=.7\textheight>>>

\fn{from  Lindblad-Toh et al.\ (2011) \emph{Nature}}
[center]>

[[[.6\linewidth]]]
* Massively increase sequenced branch length
* Emphasis on \emph{increased power} resulting from added sequence
* Project was comparative from the start
* BUT: genomes are low-quality (mean 2x read depth, ~85\% of genome covered)
[columns]>

=== Molecular Evolution and Codon Models ===

==== Mutation and Selection ====

* DNA mutations occur randomly
** in humans: $1x10^-8$ mutations per site per generation, or 70 per person (((Keightley, PD. (2012) \emph{Genetics} 190: 295-304)))
* Over time, \emph{Natural selection} in a population:
*# removes deleterious alleles
*# promotes beneficial alleles
* To detect beneficial / deleterious alleles: compare evolutionary rate to a \emph{neutral} reference
* Same principle underlies:
*# GERP / PhastCons elements
*# Human-accelerated regions
*# \dnds in protein-coding genes

==== Natural Selection in Proteins ====

<[center]
<<<figs/genetic_code.png,height=.35\textheight>>>
[center]>

* Degeneracy of genetic code
** "silent" mutations ==> \emph{neutral} reference
* Detect non-neutral selection acting on protein-altering mutations
* Compare nonsynonymous rate (\dN) to synonymous rate (\dS)
** \dN $\approx$ \dS ==> neutral evolution
** \dN $<$ \dS ==> conservation / negative selection
** \dN $>$ \dS ==> positive selection

==== Detecting Selection with Codon Models ====

<[center]
<<<figs/codon_model.png,width=.8\linewidth>>>
[center]>

* Model the evolution of DNA sequences in terms of codons
** Incorporate \omg$=$\dnds as a model parameter
** Find parameter values which best fit the data (sequence alignment)
* Likelihood ratio tests (LRTs) for testing when \omg $\not=$ 1 produce:
** The strength of positive or purifying selection ($\hat{\omega}$)
** The strength of \emph{evidence} for said selection (LRT score)

==== Reality Check ====

* Wait... why are we interested in positive selection anyway?

==== Previous Genome-Wide Studies ====

* 2003, 2005: scans in human-chimp-mouse and human-chimp using LRTs

<[columns]
[[[.5\linewidth]]]
<[center]
<<<figs/rhesus_tree.png,height=.25\textheight>>>
[center]>
	
* 2007: Rhesus genome analysis, LRTs for positive selection in 6 mammalian genomes

[[[.5\linewidth]]]
<[center]
<<<figs/kosiol_tree.png,height=.3\textheight>>>
[center]>
	
* 2008: Kosiol et al. LRTs in 6 mammalian genomes

[columns]>

==== Previous Genome-Wide Studies ====

* Found many positively-selected genes (PSGs) related to:
** Sensory perception (olfaction, hearing)
** Apoptosis and spermatogenesis
** Iron binding and keratin formation
\vspace{.3cm}
* Presumed causative factors:
** Host-pathogen "evolutionary arms race"
** Sexual selection / genetic conflict
** Functional adaptations (gene- or organism- level)

==== Previous Genome-Wide Studies ====
<[center]
<<<figs/deep_narrow.pdf,width=1\linewidth>>>
[center]>

* Deep but narrow
* In-depth analysis, many species, one or a few genes

\fn{Gibbs, HL and Rossiter, W. (2008). Rapid evolution by positive selection and gene gain and loss: PLA(2) venom genes in closely related Sistrurus rattlesnakes with divergent diets. \emph{J Mol Evol} 66, 151-166}

==== Previous Genome-Wide Studies ====
<[center]
<<<figs/broad_shallow.pdf,width=1\linewidth>>>
[center]>

* Broad but shallow
* Genome-wide, but limited resolution and power

\fn{Rhesus Macaque Sequencing Consortium (2007). Evolutionary and biomedical insights from the Rhesus Macaque genome. \emph{Science} 316, 222-234.}

==== Contrast with Previous Studies  ====
<[center]
<<<figs/tree_sizes.pdf,width=1\linewidth>>>
[center]>


==== Questions to be Investigated ====

* Technical questions:
** Are low-coverage genomes a deal-breaker?
** How much power comes from additional branch length?
* Biological questions:
** Do different mammalian orders show similar or different patterns?

== Data Collection ==

=== Gene Trees ===

==== Ancient Duplications in Ensembl Trees ====
<[columns]
[[[.5\linewidth]]]
<[center]
<<<figs/ensembl_tree_a.pdf,height=.7\textheight>>>
[center]>

[[[.5\linewidth]]]
<[center]
<<<figs/ensembl_tree_b.pdf,height=.7\textheight>>>
[center]>

[columns]>

==== Ancient Duplications in Ensembl Trees ====

<[center]
<<<figs/hist_ens_roots.pdf,width=.95\linewidth>>>
[center]>

==== Identifying "Largely-Orthologous Trees" with Taxonomic Criteria  ====

<[center]
<<<figs/ensembl_tree_b.pdf,height=.7\textheight>>>
[center]>

==== "Largely-Orthologous Trees": Results ====

<[center]
<<<figs/hist_euth_roots.pdf,width=.85\linewidth>>>
[center]>

* 16,477 largely-orthologous trees in Eutherian mammals
* Smooth distribution of tree sizes
** "Long tail" of trees with family expansions

==== Genome-Specific Duplication and Loss Patterns ====

<[center]
<<<figs/ortholog_euth_dups.pdf,height=.7\textheight>>>
[center]>

=== Data Filtering ===

==== Filtering on Sequence Quality ====

<[center]
<<<figs/qual_filter_hist.pdf,height=.8\textheight>>>
[center]>

==== Removing Apparent Paralogs  ====

<[center]
<<<figs/mammals_paralogs_scatter.pdf,width=.85\linewidth>>>
[center]>

* Why remove paralogs?
** "Split" paralogs: erroneous annotations
** Elevated adaptive evolution after duplication-divergence

==== Clusters of Nonsynonymous Mutations: Example ====

<[center]
<<<figs/mammals_cluster_subs.pdf,width=.9\linewidth>>>
[center]>

==== Clusters of Nonsynonymous Mutations: Results ====
<[columns]
[[[.25\linewidth]]]
<[center]
<<<figs/species_tree.pdf,height=.6\textheight>>>
[center]>

[[[.75\linewidth]]]
<[center]
<<<figs/wcs_15_int.pdf,height=.45\textheight>>>
[center]>

[columns]>

==== Clusters of Nonsynonymous Mutations: Results ====
<[columns]
[[[.25\linewidth]]]
<[center]
<<<figs/species_tree.pdf,height=.6\textheight>>>
[center]>

[[[.75\linewidth]]]
<[center]
<<<figs/wcs_15_ext.pdf,height=.7\textheight>>>
[center]>

[columns]>

==== Additional Filters ====

<[center]
<<<figs/qc_hist_mammals.pdf,width=.9\linewidth>>>
[center]>

== Analysis and Results ==

=== Global Distributions of Sitewise Estimates ===

==== Global Distribution of dN/dS Mammals ====

<[center]
<<<figs/global_dist_6.pdf,width=.95\linewidth>>>
[center]>
* Ca. 6M protein-coding sites
* ML \omg estimate
* Lower / upper bounds

==== Global Distributions of dN/dS in Ten Species Groups ====
<[columns]
[[[.45\linewidth]]]
<[center]
<<<figs/global_distributions.pdf,clip,trim=0 23cm 0 0,height=.6\textheight>>>
[center]>

[[[.45\linewidth]]]
<[center]
<<<figs/global_distributions.pdf,clip,trim=0 0 0 20cm,height=.6\textheight>>>
[center]>

[columns]>

==== Sitewise p-values for Positive Selection ====
<[columns]
[[[.5\linewidth]]]
<[center]
<<<figs/pset_pvals.pdf,clip,trim=0 27cm 0 0,height=.5\textheight>>>
[center]>

[[[.5\linewidth]]]
<[center]
<<<figs/pset_pvals.pdf,clip,trim=0 0 0 27cm,height=.5\textheight>>>
[center]>

[columns]>

=== Combining Sitewise Estimates Across Genes and Domains ===

==== Comparing Between Groups: the Mammalian Superorders ====
<[center]
<<<figs/tree_sizes_2.pdf,height=.72\textheight>>>
[center]>

==== Gene-by-Gene \dnds in Species Groups --- Effecs of \Ne ====

<[center]
<<<figs/genes_p_g.pdf,height=.75\textheight>>>
[center]>

==== Gene-by-Gene \dnds in Species Groups --- Effecs of \Ne ====

<[center]
<<<figs/genes_g_l.pdf,height=.75\textheight>>>
[center]>

==== Gene-by-Gene \dnds in Species Groups --- Effecs of \Ne ====

<[center]
<<<figs/genes_p_a.pdf,height=.75\textheight>>>
[center]>

==== PSG Overlap Between Species Groups ====

<[center]
<<<figs/psg_venns.pdf,clip,trim=0 20cm 0 0,width=.9\linewidth>>>
[center]>

==== PSG Overlap Between Statistical Methods ====

<[center]
<<<figs/psg_venns.pdf,clip,trim=0 0 0 20cm,width=.9\linewidth>>>
[center]>

=== Comparison to Previously-Published Studies ===

==== PSG Overlap Between Different Studies ====

<[center]
<<<figs/pub_psg_venn.pdf,width=.95\linewidth>>>
[center]>

==== ROC Plot --- Enrichment for Strongest PSGs ====

<[center]
<<<figs/psg_rocs.pdf,height=.75\textheight>>>
[center]>

%==== Table --- Enrichment for Functional Groups ====
%<[center]
%<<<figs/psg_table.pdf,height=.7\textheight>>>
%[center]>

==== Table --- Enrichment for Functional Groups ====

<[center]
<<<figs/go_1.png,height=.73\textheight>>>
[center]>

==== Table --- Enrichment for Functional Groups ====

<[center]
<<<figs/go_2.png,clip,trim=0 0 15cm 0,height=.3\textheight>>>
[center]>

==== Table --- Enrichment for Positively-Selected Protein Domains ====
<[center]
<<<figs/psg_table_3.pdf,clip,trim=0 4.1cm 4cm 0,width=.95\linewidth>>>
[center]>

==== Table --- Enrichment for Positively-Selected Protein Domains ====
<[center]
<<<figs/psg_table_3.pdf,clip,trim=0 0 4cm 8cm,width=.95\linewidth>>>
[center]>


==== Putative Gene Conversion between Nearby Paralogous Pairs ====

<[center]
<<<figs/psg_table_2.pdf,height=.7\textheight>>>
[center]>


==== Case Study: Mannose-Binding Lectin 2 ====

<[columns]

[[[.4\linewidth]]]
<[center]
<<<figs/mbl2_fig.jpg,height=.5\textheight>>>

[center]>

[[[.6\linewidth]]]
* Collectin family member
** Binds carbohydrates of invading pathogens
** Facilitates phagocytosis, activates complement pathway
* High frequencies of collagen-disrupting alleles
** At odds with supposed important immune function
** Recent selection favoring low MBL levels?
** Longer-term host-immune conflict?
[columns]>

==== Case Study: Mannose-Binding Lectin 2 ====
\vspace{.3cm}

\begin{exampleblock}{}
  {\large ``MBL2 is well conserved in agreement with its important role in the immune system.''}
  \vskip5mm
  {\tiny Verga F et al. (2004). Evolution of the mannose-binding lectin gene in primates. \emph{Genes and Immunity}, 5, 653-661.}
\end{exampleblock}
\begin{quote}
\end{quote}

But...
\vspace{.3cm}

\begin{exampleblock}{}
  {\large ``The evolutionary neutrality of MBL2 strongly supports [...] that this lectin is largely redundant in host human defences''}
  \vskip5mm
  {\tiny Verdu P et al. (2006). Evolutionary insights into the high worldwide prevalence of \emph{MBL2} deficiency alleles. \emph{Human Molecular Genetics}, 15, 2650-2658.}
\end{exampleblock}
\begin{quote}
\end{quote}

==== Case Study: Mannose-Binding Lectin 2 ====

With sitewise estimates, a more balanced picture arises

==== Case Study: Mannose-Binding Lectin 2 ====

<[center]
<<<figs/mbl2.pdf,crop,trim=0 0 100cm 0,height=.7\textheight>>>
[center]>


==== Case Study: Mannose-Binding Lectin 2 ====

<[center]
<<<figs/mbl2.pdf,crop,trim=0 0 50cm 0,width=.9\linewidth>>>
[center]>

==== Case Study: Mannose-Binding Lectin 2 ====

<[center]
<<<figs/mbl2.pdf,crop,trim=0 0 0 0,width=.95\linewidth>>>
[center]>

* Large number of purifying sites; \emph{MBL2} is functional across mammals
** Strongest conservation tract within collagen domain
* Some regions show positive selection
** No overlap with location of human SNPs (starred)
** Potential protein-protein or protein-ligand interacting regions

== Wrap-up ==

=== Conclusions and Future Work ===

==== Questions: Do We Have Answers Now? ====

* Are low-coverage genomes a deal-breaker?
** Likely not
** With appropriate (read: laborious) filtering applied
* How much power comes from additional branch length?
** Plenty (Cf. sitewise p-value plots)
* Do different mammalian orders show similar or different patterns?
** Initially appears to be the case
*** Primates/Laurasiatheria:  "high" signal for pos-sel
*** Glires: "low" signal
** However, conflating factors abound
*** \Ne, branch length, genome quality

==== Future Work ====

* Surprising lack of correspondance between studies
* More transparent, direct comparisons would aid awareness
** Goal: a reference database of evolutionary estimates in mammals
** Examples exist (e.g. Selectome), but somewhat lackluster
* Important factors:
** Alignment error
** Species sampling
** Methods and models

\vspace{.3cm}

* Better understanding of the connection between \Ne and between-species divergence
* Corroborate the distribution of fitness effects (DFE) in population vs.\ divergence studies
* Use simulations to critically evaluate species group differences

==== Acknowledgements ====
* People
** Goldman Group
** Ensembl Compara (esp. Albert and Javier)
** Collaborators (Broad Institute, for all the genes)
* Money
** Gates Cambridge Trusts
** EMBL-EBI
* Time
** Thanks for yours :)

\vspace{.3cm}
{\tiny Note: this presentation was made with \LaTeX, Beamer + Wiki2Beamer}

{\tiny {{http://github.com/gjuggler/talk-pdoc-seminar}}}

==== Alignment Error: Not a Significant Concern ====

<[center]
<<<figs/fig4.pdf,height=.7\textheight>>>
[center]>

==== Method Choice: Not a Significant Concern ====

<[center]
<<<figs/fig2.pdf,height=.7\textheight>>>
[center]>

==== GC Content	: Still a Concern ====

<[center]
<<<figs/sorted_sites_gc.pdf,height=.7\textheight>>>
[center]>
